As I rise to present the second budget of the democratic government, I want to thank Allah (SWT) for remarkable mercies He has bestowed on us by giving enormous success to the policies and initiatives we announced in our first budget. This success is the outcome of a democratic process that has allowed people to choose their representatives and they, in turn, are working to achieve their aspirations.
When we started our journey, we were facing the most daunting task of repairing a broken economy. We embarked on a very comprehensive agenda of economic reforms aimed to reinvigorate the economy, spur growth, maintain price stability, provide jobs to the youth and rebuild the key infrastructure of the country. Prime Minister Mohammed Nawaz Sharif set a rare example of foresight, courage and political sagacity when he did not shy away from taking painful decisions; decisions that were surely unpopular but imperative for restoring economic health of the country. Today, with the blessings of Allah, I say in all humility that we have not only restored the health of the economy but have put it firmly on the path of stability and growth.
I by no means, am claiming that we have achieved our highest goals, however, I can gratefully and with humility, inform this House that Pakistan today is much more strong, healthy and prosperous than where it was one year before. But we need not be complacent with achievements so far.We are far from our destination. Therefore, we have to continue to strive and move forward, so that we achieve the status and stature among the nation, which we deserve, given our abilities. This is a national agenda and we hope that in order to achieve this, both side of the Parliament shall guide and favor us with valuable suggestions.
Review of Economic Performance 2013-14
Mr. Speaker:
I would like to place before this august House the following key economic indicators, based largely on latest data, which point to an unmistakable revival of the economy:
Economic Growth, which had averaged around 3% in the five years before our government, has been projected at 4.14%as per the revised estimates. This is the highest growth in the last six years;
Per Capita Income, which stood at $1339 last year is projected to increase to $1386, showing a growth of 3.5%;
Industrial Sector, which grew by a meager 1.37% during Jul-Feb last year, has registered a growth of 5.84%, aided by increased availability of electricity and better management of available gas supplies. This is also highest in the last six years;
Inflation, which had averaged around 12% in the five years before our government, was recorded at 8.6% for Jul-May 2013-14, that too despite the fact that we had takendifficult decisions to raise taxes and rationalize energy prices;
FBR revenues, which had registered one of the poorest performances of in the recent past of 3% growth in 2012-13, are up by 16.4%, rising from Rs.1,679 billion to Rs.1,955 billion in the first 11 months of the current year;
Fiscal deficit, which was registered at 5.5% during Jul-Apr 2012-13, has been brought down to only 4.0% for the same period this year. Here I would like to remind that in the revised estimates for 2012-13, we were told that the fiscal deficit will be 8.8%. We had taken office only a few days earlier but even then in the three weeks of June 2014, concerted efforts were made to economize on spending. The result was that actual deficit was brought down to 8.2%. This year, the target was to reduce deficit to 6.3%, but we are achieving a deficit of 5.8%, which is an excellent achievement;
Credit to Private Sector, which was registered at Rs.92.5billion during 1st July 2012 to 9thMay 2013has increased to Rs.296.4 billion for the same period this year, showing a growth of 318% and reflecting increased investment activity in the private sector, thanks mainly to reduced borrowings by the government, mainly from SBP, which were completely eliminated froma level of Rs.417 billion last to a negative Rs.11 billion during this year;
Exports were recorded at $21billion during Jul-Apr 2013-14 compared to $20.1billion last year, showing an increase of 4.24%;
Imports were recorded at $37.1 billion during Jul-Apr 2013-14 compared to $36.7 billion last year and showing a marginal growth of 1.2%. However, imports of machinery have increased by an impressive 11% an indication of investment activity;
Remittances, which were recorded at $11.6 billion during Jul-Apr 2012-13, rose to $12.9 billion for the same period this year, showing an increase of 11.5%, which is remarkable and for which I salute my expatriate Pakistanis for playing such a critical role in country's economy;
Exchange Rate, which experienced some instability due to speculative activity and initially declining reserves due to heavy repayments due from previous IMF loan, has been successfully stabilized and significantly appreciated subsequently. The speculators had thought that government would sit idly while they play havoc with the dollar. They had pushed the rate to approximately Rs.111on 3rd December, which was totally unacceptable, as it had no economic justification. While dealing sternly with them we have expended serious efforts to stabilize the reserves position and also improved the basic economic indicators. Since 3rdDecember 2013, the rupee has appreciated by 11%. It has been trading in the range of Rs.98-99 for nearly three months, and this is the single most important indicator of economic stability as it affects a large number of other variables like prices and cost of production. A stable exchange is the lynchpin of a stable economy;
Foreign Exchange Reserves, which had declined to a precarious level when in June 2013 SBP they stood at $6 billion, of which $2 billion were due to a swap that was payable in August. More importantly, besides regular debt servicing, a payment of $3.2 billion was due to IMF, bulk of which in the first half of the fiscal year. On 10th February 2014, country's reserves had further declined to $7.58 billion, of which SBP reserves amounted to a meager $2.70 billion and those of commercial banks amounted to $4.88 billion. Many had predicted that Pakistan would soon default. It is from such a precipice that we have pulled the economy back and put it in on sound footing. For reasons I will be alluding to in my speech, foreign exchange reserves of the country have entered safe territory and no longer pose any risk to the economy. Even though reserves atpresent stand at around $13.5 billion, we will be pushing them to $15.0 billion, much in advance of our target to achieve this level by 31stDecember.
Karachi Stock Exchange Index, which stood at 19,916 on 11 May 2013, the day the elections were held, has continuously scaled new heights and stood at 29,543 on 29 May 2014, showing an increase of 46%. Also, this increase meant an increase of approximately 39% in market capitalization both in rupees and dollars.
Incorporation of New Companies, which was recorded at 3212 during Jul-Apr last year has increased to 3655 during the same period this year, showing an increase of 13.79%;
In addition to above, we have achieved certain results that have eluded the previous government for its five year term:
Euro Bond: Every year, since 2007-08, a provision had been made to raise foreign exchange resources through the issuance of Euro Bonds, which were last issued in 2006 and each year either no efforts were made as performance of the economy did not warrant or once a team on the roadshows aborted the attempt for lack of interest and demand for Pakistan bond. And please note that this was an exchangeable bond with equity in OGDCL, a company registered and traded in London Stock Exchange. Allah has been extremely kind in making our efforts remarkably successful in the very first year of our government. After achieving economic stability we immediately embarked on raising resources from the international capital market. We had set a modest target of $500 million. As we completed the roadshows on 7th April 2014 and briefed investors about our policies and results so far achieved, we received an unprecedented response from them. Against our target of $500 million, investors offered $7.0 billion, which meant nearly 14-time oversubscription. Encouraged by this phenomenal response, and keeping in view our pressing needs for building reserves, we decided to accept $2.0 billion of offers. The pricing was internationally competitive and significantly better than the prices at which we are raising resources domestically, even after accounting for possible exchange rate adjustments. More importantly, the foreign resources so raised have allowed us to retire domestic debt that is more expensive, and enabled greater flow of credit toward the private sector, as I have already noted.
Resumption of Program Lending: For a long time, and largely due to failure to implement the previous IMF program the country was denied access to program lending both by World Bank and Asian Development Bank (ADB). These loans, particularly the cheap financing from the World Bank, are given for budgetary support and augment foreign resource availability for the purpose of balance of payments. The high quality of economic management undertaken by the government has inspired the confidence of both these institutions and we have succeeded in securing $1.4 billion from these two institutions in the two key sectors namely energy reforms and competitive and growth support reforms.
Auction of Spectrum License: Another notable achievement of our government is the successful auction of radio spectrum license of 3G and 4G. This is again an area where budget provision of Rs.50-79 billion has been consistently made since the budget of 2009-10 without any success. Even though we had raised the budgetary provision to Rs.120 billion we succeeded in realizing our goal. Not only have we achieved our target price, through a built in incentive mechanism that prompted two of the four winners to make upfront payment of 100% price, we still have two more licenses that we will sell during the next fiscal year. All of this we have achieved with total transparency, competition and in full view of the world. Pakistan has lagged behind in introducing new technologies but we have removed this obstacle. Those who have purchased these licenses are extremely bullish in their assessment of Pakistan's growth potential. To understand the potential of what is in store for economic growth from this sector, it may be noted that even though we have more than 130 million cell phone subscribers, we have less than 10% penetration of broadband (data transmission), which will make all smartphone connected to internet and thereby all users to take advantage of global connectivity. A new wave of economic growth is likely to be spurred from the introduction of this technology in the country.