Punjab Chief Minister Muhammad Shahbaz Sharif has said that a number for foreign companies are investing billion of rupees in Punjab, taking benefit of the conducive atmosphere and investment friendly policies of the government.
He said that scope of the modern cleanliness system introduced in Lahore with the collaboration of Turk companies is being expanded to other big cities of the province. Work is continuing round the clock on Rawalpindi-Islamabad metro bus project, while metro bus projects at Multan and Faisalabad have been planned. He invited Turk investors to make investment in Punjab and they will be provided all out facilities.
He expressed these views during meeting with a delegation of Turk investor Kiler Holding Group here on Monday. Investment in energy, construction, transport, retail super store and other sectors in Pakistan especially Punjab was discussed. The Chief Minister said a modern hospital constructed by Turkey in South Punjab is a unique gift by the leadership and government of Turkey for the people of the area. Shahbaz Sharif said that Tayyip Erdogan Hospital will soon become operational and latest medical facilities will be available to the people. He said that construction work of state-of-the-art school has been completed in district Muzaffargarh with the cooperation of Turkey.
He said that the friendship of both the countries has transformed into strong economic relations and trade cooperation. He said that although Turk companies are making investment in Punjab, however, if Kiler Holding Group of investors is willing to invest in Punjab, it will be provided every possible facility. Shahbaz Sharif said that Punjab government is working on low cost housing schemes and Turk investors can cooperate in this project. He said that the brotherly relations and friendship between Pakistan and Turkey have strengthened as a result of collaboration between Punjab government and Turk companies.
Members of the delegation of Turk investors said that they are interested to invest in different sectors of Punjab and their group has expertise in e-governance. They further said that they will cooperate with Punjab government in the promotion of e-governance. Those in the delegation of Turk investors included Vice Chairman Group Umit Kiler and Group Advisor Rasim Kaan Aytogu.
Meanwhile, a delegation of Turkish Group Kiler Holding, headed by its chairman Nahit Kiler, visited Punjab Board of Investment & Trade (PBIT) and held talks with PBIT high-ups regarding investment opportunities in Punjab. Other members of the delegation were Vice Chairman Umit Kiler and Group CFO Dr Rasim. The delegation showed its interest in promoting business relationships and making investments in Punjab.
Director General Projects PBIT Ali Pirzada apprised the delegation about the working of PBIT and highlighted the prospects of foreign investment in Punjab. He told the delegation that Punjab government is offering a pro-business environment to generate investment. He also informed about the guidance and technical support provided by PBIT to foreign and local companies. Presentations were also given to Turkish delegation by various departments including energy, transport and Lahore Development Authority (LDA) on this occasion.The meeting ended with the exchange of souvenirs.
Kiler Holding is a renowned group of companies and owner of well known brands in Turkey with more than 20 years of experience in food, retail, construction, energy, transportation and tourism sectors.