Murdoch empire wreaks havoc by Praful Bidwai

What began as a limited crisis in the Rupert Murdoch-owned and now-closed News of the World tabloid in Britain has grown into a tempest which threatens News Corporation, the world’s biggest media empire. The 10 arrests made so far – including that of News International CEO Rebekah Brooks, and Les Hinton, who headed Dow Jones, the business information agency which also runs The Wall Street Journal – , and the resignation of the London Metropolitan police commissioner, have thrown British society into turmoil and could politically singe Prime Minister David Cameron.
The crisis was triggered by allegations that News of the World (NOTW) paid the police for information and also hacked into the voicemail accounts of celebrities and people whose relatives had suffered grave tragedies. The British public was outraged at NOTW’s horrible invasion of privacy and exploitation of human suffering.
The scandal’s ramifications soon widened. Andy Coulson, the NOTW editor responsible for the hacking, who became Cameron’s communications chief, was arrested. Former NOTW deputy editor Neil Wallis, with Scotland Yard as public relations adviser, was also arrested for his alleged involvement in hacking voicemail. Scotland Yard chief Paul Stephenson resigned for having hired him. While resigning, Stephenson said: “Unlike Mr Coulson, Mr Wallis had not resigned from NOTW, nor to the best of my knowledge, been in any way associated with the original phone-hacking investigation.”
This has put Cameron on the mat and highlighted the double standards being applied to his office and the Metropolitan police. Cameron is already on the defensive because of his proximity to Brooks and Coulson. He has had 26 social meetings with Murdoch’s executives in his 15 months as PM. Stephenson’s resignation was seen as an honourable act. But Cameron’s reputation has been dented after as-yet-unsubstantiated allegations that Brooks had lobbied him to appoint Coulson as the Conservatives’ communications director.
This crisis has reached the Murdoch empire’s apex. Brooks, whom Murdoch trusts and relies on completely, was NOTW editor (2000-2003). Journalists who worked under her describes the work as “dubious information-gathering, [with] reporters under intense pressure … to land exclusive stories by whatever means necessary, and a culture of fear, cynicism … and fierce internal competition”.
A former reporter says: “We used to talk to career criminals all the time. They were our sources. It was a macho thing: ‘My contact is scummier than your contact.’ It was a case of: ‘Mine’s a murderer!’”
This is the culture of Murdochisation on which News Corporation founded its $32.8 billion global empire. Murdochisation has three components. First, the complete subsumption and subordination of the editorial process under the management, and total loss of editorial independence. Murdoch has no use for concepts like freedom of expression or editorial judgment and doesn’t distinguish between ownership and day-to-day, headline-to-headline interference in his publications.
A second ingredient of Murdochisation is contempt for truthfulness and honesty. As a commentator points out: “ Murdoch thought it was a great idea to publish Hitler’s diaries, though he had been warned they were phony; when the hoax was exposed he shrugged it off, saying, ‘After all, we are in the entertainment business’.” One of his papers carried on a “cruelly irresponsible anti-science” campaign, questioning the very existence of an AIDS epidemic in Africa.
Murdoch has no use for morality. His practice of censorship would embarrass even dictators. His Star TV once beamed to China BBC broadcasts highly critical of corruption there. He pompously claimed that satellite TV posed “an unambiguous threat to totalitarian regimes everywhere”. But Chinese leaders didn’t want the BBC programme. So Murdoch simply reoriented the satellite and killed all BBC broadcasts beamed to China!
Third, Murdochisation involves political lobbying and influence-peddling, with blatant market manipulation through anti-competition practices such as pricing one’s publications below its cost to capture the market. Murdoch has shamelessly paid money to political leaders, transforming the notion of what is acceptable in news-gathering.
Like Murdoch’s brash style, the distinguishing feature of News Corporation is pure aggression. As the not-too-critical Economist puts it: It “combines the heft of a big company with the scrappiness of a start-up”, and believes “competitors are to be crushed”. News America, another News Corp subsidiary, is a good example of the methods Murdoch executives use to inspire their staff.
News America is headed by Paul Carlucci, who, according to Forbes magazine, used to show the sales staff the scene in The Untouchables in which Al Capone beats a man to death with a baseball bat. News America Marketing recently spent $655 million to suppress embarrassing charges of corporate espionage and anti-competitive behaviour.
Murdochisation, regrettably, has become a worldwide phenomenon and afflicted newspapers, magazines and TV channels in India too. The only difference is that India has Murdochisation without Murdoch. Many major Indian media groups practise that model. They obliterate the distinction between the media’s editorial and business functions. They dumb down editorial content to frivolous and trivial tittle-tattle, and play down news or views relevant to understanding India, South Asia and the world.
So long as news is titillating, it should be sold – through predatory pricing if not by normal means. Many Indian media conglomerates with dozens of editions and deep pockets sell newspapers which cost Rs10 to produce at Rs2. They are less interested in professional journalists than in shopkeepers who double as reporters and offer deals on cooking utensils to their subscribers.
Much of India’s media is simply not geared to inform the public on the socio-economic and political processes at work in the country, including shifts in the balance of power between different groups – leave alone promote comprehension of the dynamics that are shaping decision-making structures and India’s changing relations with its neighbours and the world.
The mainstream paradigm in the Indian media, with a few honourable exceptions, is shockingly insensitive to flesh-and-blood people’s concerns, especially of the poor. Its principal – and matter-of-factly stated – aim is to “pump sunshine” into the consumerist elite’s life.
There is a major lesson for all of South Asia’s media in the Murdoch empire’s crisis. Murdochisation will not work, and cannot succeed, beyond a point. It won’t be a surprise if News Corp is subjected in Britain to restrictions on its news-gathering and business practices. Ultimately, Murdochisation will be damaged irreparably by its crisis of credibility. There is simply no substitute for the basic values of journalism – truthfulness, accuracy and relevance in reporting, pluralism in the expression of views, and functioning with a sense of social responsibility.
The exposure of News Corporation’s serious wrongdoing was driven strongly by public outrage and revulsion in Britain. In India, the middle-class conscience has not been outraged enough by the illegitimate interaction between corporate interests, mainstream politics and journalists, exposed in the Radia tapes. Most journalists implicated in the tapes have got off lightly.
Much of India’s big corporate media is conservative and retrograde, and faces a serious crisis of credibility. If it does not reform itself, it will lose all authenticity, reliability and credibility, and matter only as a source of cheap entertainment.
Journalism will then cease to be all that makes it worthy and socially relevant: an honest, investigative, analytical, public-oriented and ethical endeavour. That would be a grave tragedy and a terrible disservice to democracy.
