In God’s country by Hajrah Mumtaz

`TERRORISM` may well be the currently most bandied-about word in the world`s lexicon. Governments lose sleep over it, citizenries live in fear of it and the news is full of it.
We in Pakistan have come to know it well. We know only too well the split nature of the debate: what ideology drives terrorism and how valid is it? Might we agree with the ideology/goal even if not the tactics used? And, subjectively, is the mot juste `terrorism` or `freedom fighting`?
As with most such matters (and one only has to look at the case of Kashmir or Soviet-occupied Afghanistan for illumination) one man`s terrorist is another`s freedom fighter.
The etymology of the word sheds some scant light over the lack of agreement. As nearly as I have been able to pin down, the word `terrorism` dates from the French `Reign of Terror` (1793-94) — the Jacobin government`s efforts to nullify opposition to the French Revolution.
In randomly researching this subject, a book that I read years ago re-presented itself to me for attention. Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism by Robert Pape, specialist in international security politics and professor in political science, was published in 2005.
Back then, the book caused waves because it suggested a (fruitless) fundamental rethink in the manner in which the US was, policy-wise, reacting to the 9/11 attacks.
Focusing purely on the suicide bombing phenomenon of terrorism, Prof Pape compiled a database of every suicide bombing and attack around the world from 1980 to 2003: 315 known incidents in all. He defined a suicide attack as one in which “at least one terrorist killed himself or herself while attempting to kill others; [excluding] attacks authorised by a national government, for example by North Korea against the South”.
The book gained prominence because it suggested — contrary to the US-led discourse of the time (and, arguably, continuing) — that “there is little connection between suicide terrorism and Islamic fundamentalism, or any one of the world`s religions”.
As the leading group in this sort of terrorism in the period under review, he refers to the Tamil Tigers which, though of Hindu origin, define themselves as a Marxist-Leninist group opposed as policy to religion.
Reading that book in 2006, while the militant/insurgent problem in Pakistan was (in comparison to today) just gaining steam, was a remarkably different experience from going through it now.
It was directed towards US policymakers, published as it was soon after the invasion of Iraq.
A perusal of it today offers insight into Pakistan`s own nemeses, the homegrown (or at least, home-supported) militants that have returned to haunt the state.
Pape concludes that the one factor that nearly all suicide terror attacks have in common “is a specific and strategic goal: to compel modern democracies to withdraw military forces from territory that the terrorists consider to be their homeland. Religion is rarely the root cause, although it is often used as a tool by terrorist organisations in recruiting and in other efforts in service of the broader strategic objective”.
Pape draws three general patterns from his study of suicide bombings up to 2003. The one most relevant to Pakistan`s current predicament is that nearly all such attacks “occur as part of organised campaigns, not as isolated or random incidents. Of the 315 separate attacks … studied, 301 could have their roots traced to large, coherent political or military campaigns”.
Pakistan is one of the countries where suicide bombing no longer has shock value. No longer an extreme expression of extremism (as a former ruler might have put it) it`s something to shake one`s head over and then ask about the body count.
But as a society, Pakistan fundamentally misunderstands — to its own cost — the militants and/or insurgents (they go by many organisational names) that are causing havoc. Because they have used the religion tool to recruit and advertise, Pakistanis have tended to take the soft approach, finding reasons such as disenfranchisement, the lack of education, etc, to argue away the horror of what they have unleashed.
We insist on thinking of them as a ragtag band of anarchists, indoctrinated and driven towards violent ends by poverty, the dearth of opportunity and wilful negligence by the state. But if all the readily apparent indications are anything to go by, that is as far from the truth as is possible to be.
There is plenty of evidence to conclude that the Taliban and their ilk are educated, highly organised and trained in thinking in terms of military and battleground strategy. What else do items such as the video regarding last year`s suicide attack on Karachi`s CID building, which recently surfaced on the Internet, indicate?
There is an erroneous societal assumption that the militants are in this war because of religion. Over the past decade, this is the shape the debate has tended to take. Consider the Taliban takeover of Swat`s administration under the Sufi Mohammad-brokered peace deal: there is a general sense of `well … they do want to impose Sharia`.
And the conversation has to stop there, because who in Pakistan — the Muslims out of a sense of righteous piety and non-Muslims perhaps out of fear — would say that this may not be amongst the best ideas there ever were.
As a result, we find ourselves back-pedalling on the most vital issue that Pakistan has perhaps ever faced. Regardless of what the rank and file believe if the terrorists are organised, educated and well-versed in modern technology, then what they are fighting is a political war; what they want is the country`s land and government.
Suicide terrorism tends to be a political phenomenon — not a religious one. And if that is the case in terms of Pakistan, most of us are misunderstanding this `war` entirely.
