SAN FRANCISCO — Apple on Monday introduced the latest version of its Mac operating system, which the company said was overhauled to work more seamlessly with iPhones and iPads.

Continue reading the main story
Highlights From Apple’s W.W.D.C.
Thanks for visiting. This is a developing story. Please check back again soon for updates.

Updates to the messaging app on mobile devices include group features, as well as the ability to send audio and video messages. 2:01 PM ET

Apple also introduced a new tool called Handoff, which makes it easier to work with content across different devices. 1:36 PM ET

A new cloud-based storage system for documents and other files, named iCloud Drive, could compete with services offered by start-ups like Dropbox.1:21 PM ET

The company announced updates to its desktop operating system, dubbed Yosemite, which features a streamlined toolbar and redesigned app icons.1:10 PM ET

In a keynote presentation at the company’s weeklong conference for software developers here, Apple showed some redesigned elements of its operating system for Mac computers, making it resemble much more closely the operating system the company uses on its mobile devices like iPhones.

The new Mac system, called Yosemite, includes a streamlined toolbar for using the calendar, clock and calculator. Apple also includes redesigned icons for apps included in the system — even the trash bin for holding unwanted files.

Apple also expanded its online cloud service, iCloud, with a new feature called iCloud Drive. It allows users to store files online and access them across different devices, similar to the service offered by Dropbox, a start-up in San Francisco.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE

Timothy D. Cook at Apple’s 2013 developers’ conference.At WWDC, Apple Is Set to Make Push Into Monitoring Health and HomeJUNE 1, 2014
Sometime soon, you may be able to turn your lights on with your iPhone. That, however, raises the question of what could happen if your device fell into the hands of a hacker.Disruptions: Intruders for the Plugged-In Home, Coming in Through the InternetJUNE 1, 2014
Clockwise from top left: Jimmy Iovine, Dr. Dre, Paul Deneve and Angela Ahrendts. Apple has been reclaiming what has always been its core strength, and what it lost when Steve Jobs died: Human perspective and taste.Bits | State of the Art: What the Beats Deal Says About Apple: It Loves TastemakersMAY 30, 2014
Apple is expected to announce later on Monday a new version of iOS, its mobile operating system. The company is also expected to introduce an app for logging statistics like a user’s footsteps, heart rate and sleep activity, as well as tools to make it easier for apps to communicate with home appliances.

Fans and customers anticipating new iPhones or a so-called smart watch will most likely have to wait — Apple is not expected to introduce any new hardware on Monday. The company has traditionally reserved fall and winter for its biggest product announcements to target the back-to-school and holiday shopping seasons.

Continue reading the main story
Still, Apple has not been shy about building hype around its coming products. Eddy Cue, the company’s senior vice president of Internet software and services, said at the Code conference last week that the products that Apple is poised to release this year were part of “the best product pipeline” he has seen in his 25 years at the company. New iPhones with larger screens, iPads and a smart watch are expected for release later this year.

Also last week, Apple announced it was paying $3 billion to buy Beats Electronics, the music brand that sells premium headphones and has a nascent music streaming service. The Beats brand will remain separate from Apple’s, and Apple will offer both Beats’s streaming music service and premium headphones.

The Beats deal brings Jimmy Iovine, a longtime music executive, and Dr. Dre, the rapper, to work under Mr. Cue. Dr. Dre and Mr. Iovine founded Beats in 2006.

In an interview last week, Mr. Cook, Dr. Dre, born Andre Young, and Mr. Iovine would work with Apple on the next generation of music offerings. He said they would be working on “products you haven’t thought of yet.”