AMSTERDAM — Founded in Amsterdam early last year, Fairphone is a smartphone maker with a difference. Its handset incorporates some technological advances — for example a dual SIM card option that allows it to work simultaneously with two providers and two numbers — but the company has no ambition to rival Apple or Samsung.

Fairphone’s aims are to build smartphones using only conflict-free raw materials; to provide fair working conditions during assembly; to design a phone that is robust, long-lived and fixable; to establish a comprehensive recycling system; and to be fully transparent about the entire process, including costs and pricing.

“We want to hold up a mirror to the electronic manufacturing business,” said Bas van Abel, the founder and chief executive of the company.

Mr. van Abel says he chose to manufacture cellphones because of their ubiquity and because they present a certain paradox. The telephone “is the hyper-symbol of connectivity, but we’ve lost any connection with the source of how it is made, who made it, where does it come from and the social consequences attached to it during the production process,” he said in an interview. “Every pixel you see, every byte you send, has a whole world of minerals, factories, recycling and distribution behind it.”

Photo

Fairphone's founder, Bas van Abel: ‘‘We wanted to cre- ate a debate about fairness’’ and electronics industry practices. Credit Arne Kuilman
“We wanted to create a debate about fairness,” Mr. van Abel added, sitting in the company’s open-plan, one-floor space in the Pakhuis de Zwijger, or Zwijger Warehouse, a multimedia networking center in a converted building in Amsterdam’s eastern docklands.

Mr. van Abel contends that how consumer electronics are made is as important as the actual product. “The phone shouldn’t be the subject,” he said, though in the buzz of 15 staffers trying to process orders, help customers and iron out order glitches for a new batch of handsets, it clearly was the subject.

In May last year, Fairphone turned to crowdfunding, through its web store, to finance a first batch of at least 5,000 phones, each priced at 350 euros, or $476. It set a one-month target for raising the money and got there in two weeks. By November, 25,000 units, each fully prepaid, were being produced in a Chinese factory. On Christmas Eve, they were delivered to the Netherlands. Customers received their orders in early January, in some cases seven months after paying the full purchase price.

“For the first buyers — the evangelists, as we call them — the delay wasn’t such a problem, but those who bought in closer to the date, there was definitely pushback,” said Tessa Wernink, Fairphone’s communication director and one of the six founders of the business.

The next batch, for which the company is now seeking 35,000 orders, is planned for this year.

Fairphone hopes eventually to sell enough handsets to go into continuous production. “The phone business is a volume-based business — the minimum order of quantity starts at around 150,000 to 200,000 units,” Mr. van Abel said. “If we want to be able to do that, we have to have a steady supply chain.”

Still, he says, the world does not really need more smartphones: “Buy a Fairphone, but only if you need a new phone,” he said at a recent presentation.

One person who did need a new phone was Janet Berridge, a 62-year-old translator who lives in London and travels regularly to Berlin. She became an early customer last summer when her previous phone broke.

“There is so much these days that breaks; and once it is broken, you throw it on the scrapheap, and we hate that idea,” Ms. Berridge said.

Continue reading the main storyContinue reading the main story
Advertisement

 
Ms. Berridge, however, is hardly a typical customer. According to company figures, the average Fairphone buyer is about 37 years old. Nearly a third are engineers or technology workers. Many are computer programmers, who tweak and discuss the phone’s customized Android operating system and help iron out bugs.

The company’s blog, Facebook page and Twitter feed are lively spaces, where users help newcomers — and where customers criticize the company for perceived faults like failings in its sustainability vetting to a lack of female teachers in its instruction videos.

“We are mobilizing an already existing group of people,” said Joe Mier, Fairphone’s community manager, who described its core customers as technologically savvy, social media communicators who are concerned about corporate responsibility — and just waiting for the right product.

Revenue from the first batch of phones has been used, at least in part, to put the company’s stated commitment to fairness into practice. A $2.50 charge, built into the roughly €350 price tag, goes into a workers’ welfare fund at the Chinese factory, where elected workers’ representatives determine how to spend the money on improving work conditions, education and training.

In another practical expression of the company’s philosophy, it has joined a conflict-free tin mining organization that helps buyers obtain metal from mines in the Democratic Republic of Congo without benefiting the country’s warring militias. A blog on the Fairphone website provides a forum for sharing information about conflict-free mineral legislation in the United States and Europe, and how to implement it effectively.

Other blogs on the website focus on the building of recycling centers in Ghana and on plans to reuse materials like copper in future versions of the phone.

“Transparency is one of the biggest ways to impact,” said Bibi Bleekemolen, a manager at the company.

It’s a philosophy that builds customer confidence, explaining why “evangelists” like Ms. Berridge were willing to pay €350 for a phone and then wait months for it. “I knew: My money is O.K., my money is safe,” she said. “They think like us.”